[Draft] rosa ingress with alb (#620)
rh-mobb/documentation: content/rosa/private-ingress-controller-with-alb/index.md

---
date: '2025-04-21'
title: Adding a Private Ingress Controller and a Public ALB to a ROSA Cluster 
tags: ["AWS", "ROSA"]
authors:
  - Kevin Collins
  - Paul Czarkowski
  - Diana Sari
  - Daniel Axelrod
---

Starting with OpenShift 4.14, ROSA supports adding additional Ingress Controllers which can use used to configure a custom domain on a ROSA cluster without having to use the now deprecated Custom Domain Operator. This guide shows how to add an additional Ingress Controller (public or private) to a ROSA cluster and optionally also configuring a custom domain.

In essence, the routing flow will look like this: Internet -> ALB -> NLB -> Application. 

> 

Reviewer: Also feel free to take from this intro I wrote when I drafted a similar article:

> The most straightforward way to use an Application Load Balancer in front of your ROSA cluster is via the [AWS Load Balancer Operator](https://docs.openshift.com/rosa/cloud_experts_tutorials/cloud-experts-aws-load-balancer-operator.html#validating-the-deployment_cloud-experts-aws-load-balancer-operator). However, this has the disadvantage of needing to use a NodePort Service rather than a Route for your application.
> 
> If you need the features in Routes, or have a lot of applications and don't want to have to manually manage port allocations for each of them, this guide presents an alternative architecture. You will create a secondary IngressController, which manages an NLB. You will then create an ALB whose targets are the NLB's listeners.
> 
> This has the major disadvantage of requiring TLS termination at the ALB, and having unencrypted traffic between the ALB and the cluster within your VPC. ALBs do not send Server Name Identification to their targets during the TLS handshake, and the OpenShift IngressController will reject HTTPS connections without SNI that matches one of the domain names it serves.

> 

Author: "NodePort Service rather than a Route for your application". not entirely true, they can use an "ingress" and annotate it so the ALBO knows the ingress is for it to set up on the ALB.

## Prerequisites

> * A [classic](https://cloud.redhat.com/experts/rosa/terraform/classic/) or [HCP](https://cloud.redhat.com/experts/rosa/terraform/hcp/) ROSA cluster v4.14 and above (this guide is tested on a classic multi-az Privatelink cluster, but it should work for other configurations also.)

Reviewer: The cluster must have workers in multiple AZs because ALBs require that their targets be in more than one AZ.

Author: hah yes!  I've accidently stood up a single-az cluster to test ALBs a few times in the past.

* The oc CLI      # logged in.

> * (optional) A Public Route 53 Hosted Zone, and the related Domain to use.

Author: I guess its optional in that you could manage the domain elsewhere, but for the sake of simplicity, its probably fine to call it a prereq.

> * (optional) A Public Route 53 Hosted Zone, and the related Domain to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A Domain Name in a public zone. These instructions assume Route 53, but can be adapted for any other DNS.
```

In essence, the routing flow will look like this: Internet -> ALB -> NLB -> Application. 

![routing_flow](images/routing_flow.png)
<br />

## Why this Approach

The most straightforward way to use an ALB in front of your ROSA cluster is via the [AWS Load Balancer Operator (ALBO)](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_service_on_aws/4/html/tutorials/cloud-experts-aws-load-balancer-operator). However, using ALBO requires you to either create NodePort Services or use Kubernetes Ingress resources with appropriate annotations.

This guide presents an alternative architecture that leverages OpenShift Routes and the built-in routing capabilities of the OpenShift platform. By creating a secondary IngressController (which manages an NLB) and placing an ALB in front of it, you can:

- Use standard OpenShift Route objects instead of managing NodePort Services or Ingress resources
- Avoid manually managing port allocations for multiple applications
- Attach AWS services like Web Application Firewall (WAF) or Shield to protect your applications
- Maintain compatibility with existing OpenShift deployment patterns

> This approach differs from [adding an Ingress Controller to a ROSA cluster](https://cloud.redhat.com/experts/rosa/ingress-controller/) because here it adds the additional ALB component, providing a solution to have a public-facing ALB while keeping the NLB private. 

Reviewer 2: i think the idea was that we wanted to highlight that it's ALB->NLB and not NLB->NLB like on the other paper?

> **Note**: This architecture has important TLS considerations to be aware of. AWS Application Load Balancers do not forward Server Name Indication (SNI) to their target groups as explicitly confirmed by AWS. Normally this would be problematic because OpenShift's IngressController relies primarily on SNI for routing HTTPS connections. However, this architecture works because the ALB terminates the original TLS connection and creates a new one to the NLB while preserving the HTTP Host header. When the IngressController receives a connection without SNI information, it falls back to using the Host header for routing. This makes the wildcard certificate approach essential for this architecture to function properly.

## Prerequisites

> * A [classic](https://cloud.redhat.com/experts/rosa/terraform/classic/) or [HCP](https://cloud.redhat.com/experts/rosa/terraform/hcp/) multi-az ROSA cluster v4.14 and above (this guide is tested on a classic multi-az Privatelink cluster, but it should work for other multi-az configurations also.)

Reviewer 3: it's also been tested on HCP and works ... maybe remove "(this guide is tested on a classic multi-az Privatelink cluster, but it should work for other multi-az configurations also.)"

> * A [classic](https://cloud.redhat.com/experts/rosa/terraform/classic/) or [HCP](https://cloud.redhat.com/experts/rosa/terraform/hcp/) multi-az ROSA cluster v4.14 and above (this guide is tested on a classic multi-az Privatelink cluster, but it should work for other multi-az configurations also.)

Reviewer 2: good catch, fixing it

```bash
oc get pods -n openshift-ingress | grep $INGRESS_NAME
```

Expected output is two pods in a **Running** state.

![ic_running](images/ic_running.png)
<br />

Verify the service of the new ingress controller is running.

```bash
oc get svc -n openshift-ingress router-${INGRESS_NAME}
```

![svc_running](images/svc_running.png)
<br />

Patch the service to add a healthcheck port:

```bash
oc -n openshift-ingress patch svc router-${INGRESS_NAME} -p '{"spec":{"ports":[{"port":1936,"targetPort":1936,"protocol":"TCP","name":"httphealth"}]}}'
```

Here the cluster IngressController haproxy pods expose a health check on `http://:1936/healthz/ready` that is the documented mechanism for health checks when adding a user-managed load balancer to a self-managed OpenShift. This service exposes this health check on port 1936 of the NLB per this [KCS](https://access.redhat.com/solutions/7080426).

Once you have a confirmation that the service is patched, let's grab your NLB name which will be useful for further steps.

```bash
NLB_NAME=$(oc -n openshift-ingress get svc router-private-ingress -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].hostname}' | cut -d'-' -f1)
echo $NLB_NAME
```

> ## Create the ALB

Reviewer 3: This whole section uses the aws console vs command line.  It's fine but not consistent with the rest of the mobb docs.  Should this be updated to cli commands or keep it as is?

Reviewer 2: adding to Daniel point, i think also it's much simpler to create ALB from console, so hopefully it's easier for ppl to follow

> Before we create the ALB, let's grab the IP addresses related to your NLB. Go to your AWS Console and head to the dashboard. Be sure you're in the current region where your cluster resides. From your **Console Home**, search or select **EC2** and from there, on the navigation tab, select **Network Interfaces**. Copy and paste the NLB name from the previous output on the search bar, and then scroll to the right to until you see the list of the **Primary private IPv4 IP address** related to this NLB. 

Reviewer 3: Need to say something along the lines as you will need this IP addresses later when we register targets

![sg](images/sg.png)
<br />

Next, under **Listeners and routing**, select `HTTPS` as protocol, and click **Create target group** links that will lead you to a new tab. Choose `IP addresses` as target type and give it a name, e.g. `test-tg`, and leave the rest settings to default. Under **Health checks**, leave the protocol to `HTTPS`, and point the health check path to `/healthz/ready`. Click the **Advanced health check settings**, and under **Health check port**, select **Override** and type `1936` to the port number, and you can leave the rest of the advanced health check settings to default. 

![tg_hc](images/tg_hc.png)
<br />

> Click **Next** at the end of the page and this will lead you to the **Register targets** group. Now, enter the IP addresses of your ALB that you've retrieved previously. Once you added them, click **Include as pending below**. And at the **Review targets** section, you should see the health checks are in **Pending** state. Click **Create target group** to proceed.

Reviewer 3: We are retrieve IP addresses of the NLB not ALB

Reviewer 2: good catch thank you!

![acm_pending](images/acm_pending.png)
<br />

To validate this certificate, click the **Create records in Route 53** button to proceed, click **Create records** on the next page.

![acm_record](images/acm_record.png)
<br />

Wait for a few minutes until the ACM certificate shows **Issued** status. Next, let's go back to the ALB creation tab, and under **Certificate (from ACM)** section, hit the refresh icon, and add the certificate you just created. 

![acm](images/acm.png)
<br />

Lastly, be sure everything looks good at the **Summary** section and then click **Create load balancer**. Wait for a few minutes until the ALB is fully provisioned. Grab the **DNS name** of the ALB for the next step.

## Create (or update) custom domain on Route 53 

Skip this creation step if you have already created the custom domain. To create one, go to your AWS Console. Select **Route 53** and choose a hosted zone, and from there, click **Create record** button. 

> Here you will be creating a wildcard CNAME record (e.g. `*.test.mobb.cloud`) and point it to the **DNS name** of the ALB you just created, and click **Save**. 

Reviewer 3: Why CNAME and not an A record to an AWS resource?

Reviewer 2: we're using CNAME here cos ALB are assigned DNS name rather than static IP addresses (so it's using dynamic ones)  and it has automatic IP updates as well, so it's more appropriate to use it than an A record

This guide presents an alternative architecture that leverages OpenShift Routes and the built-in routing capabilities of the OpenShift platform. By creating a secondary IngressController (which manages an NLB) and placing an ALB in front of it, you can:

- Use standard OpenShift Route objects instead of managing NodePort Services or Ingress resources
- Avoid manually managing port allocations for multiple applications
- Attach AWS services like Web Application Firewall (WAF) or Shield to protect your applications
- Maintain compatibility with existing OpenShift deployment patterns

This approach differs from [adding an Ingress Controller to a ROSA cluster](https://cloud.redhat.com/experts/rosa/ingress-controller/) because here it adds the additional ALB component, providing a solution to have a public-facing ALB while keeping the NLB private. 

> > **Note**: While this architecture configures HTTPS between the ALB and NLB as shown in the guide, there are important limitations to consider. The ALB terminates the original client TLS session and creates a new one to the NLB. However, ALBs do not send Server Name Identification (SNI) to their targets during the TLS handshake, which can cause issues with OpenShift's IngressController if you need SNI-based routing. The setup in this guide works because we're using a wildcard certificate approach that doesn't rely on SNI.

Reviewer: I've tested this and confirmed that it does work, even going back to 4.14. My previous observations of IngressController not falling back to Host headers for HTTPS connections must have been incorrect.

```suggestion
> **Note**: While this architecture configures HTTPS between the ALB and NLB as shown in the guide, there are important limitations to consider. The ALB terminates the original client TLS session and creates a new one to the NLB. However, ALBs do not send Server Name Identification (SNI) to their targets during the TLS handshake, which can cause issues with OpenShift's IngressController if you need SNI-based routing. The setup in this guide works because we're using a wildcard certificate, and the IngressController falls back on using the `Host` header when SNI is not available.
```

```

![svc_running](images/svc_running.png)
<br />

Patch the service to add a healthcheck port:

```bash
oc -n openshift-ingress patch svc router-${INGRESS_NAME} -p '{"spec":{"ports":[{"port":1936,"targetPort":1936,"protocol":"TCP","name":"httphealth"}]}}'
```
Here the cluster IngressController haproxy pods expose a health check on `http://:1936/healthz/ready` that is the documented mechanism for health checks when adding a user-managed load balancer to a self-managed OpenShift. This service exposes this health check on port 1936 of the NLB per this [KCS](https://access.redhat.com/solutions/7080426).

Once you have a confirmation that the service is patched, let's grab your NLB name which will be useful for further steps.

```bash
NLB_NAME=$(oc -n openshift-ingress get svc router-private-ingress -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].hostname}')
echo $NLB_NAME
```

![nlb_name](images/nlb_name.png)
<br />

## Create custom domain on Route 53 (optional)

Skip this step if you have already created the custom domain. To create one, go to your AWS Console. Select **Route 53** and choose a hosted zone, and from there, click **Create record** button. 

> Here you will be creating a wildcard CNAME record (e.g. `*.test.mobb.cloud`) and point it to the NLB created before:

Reviewer: What's the purpose of pointing the domain name at the NLB if we immediately repoint it to the ALB later?

Reviewer 2: makes sense, i'll move this to after ALB

![cname_rec](images/cname_rec.png)
<br />

## Create the ALB

> Before we create the ALB, let's grab the IP addresses related to your NLB. Go to your AWS Console and head to the dashboard. Be sure you're in the current region where your cluster resides. From your **Console Home**, search or select **EC2** and from there, on the navigation tab, select **Network Interfaces**. Copy and paste the NLB name from the previous output on the search bar, and then scroll to the right to until you see the list of the **Primary private IPv4 IP address** related to this NLB. 

Reviewer 2: updated the command so it gives the right output and updated the diagram also, thanks again for the super useful feedback:)
